The last stage is self-expression. It is not always achieved, not everyone needs it.
For example, work that allows you to develop your abilities, your potential.
Or complex work, work that allows you to make decisions on your own.
In principle, these are already the leaders of the higher link.
Work that allows them to make decisions on their own.
This is like a disease, like a strong drug.
In general, leadership is really a drug.
The ability to solve complex problems is often fast.
Once we read with our colleagues, with managers of the higher link,
how much time they often spend on making complex decisions.
These are top managers.
Managers who have the right to solve strategic issues,
budget issues, which can be changed by a simple stroke of a pen.
Often on very serious things, after some work.
How much time they spend.
After thinking, many said, sometimes half a minute, sometimes one and a half.
That is, seconds.
Literally, once I take responsibility, I made a decision.
This is a drug, but it is very important for people of this kind.
Creative work, of course, is also a certain drug, self-expression.
And getting new knowledge and information.
Let's go back to the IT sector.
Getting new knowledge and information is not only self-expression for them.
This is a necessary need.
Otherwise, they just miss the market.
That is, what will be fashionable in three years,
they must know now and understand how to apply it.
If they find out exactly in three years,
they will not be late for three years in competitive wrestling.
Maslow, bricks.
All the rest are built on this brick.
Alderfer.
He reworked the hierarchy of needs a little.
We remember, right?
Freud, Jung and others reworked his theory.
Pavlov, behaviorists, reworked, added to his theory.
The same thing here.
Brick, pyramid, brick, pyramid.
What did he change?
He proposed to highlight three main groups of needs.
What are these groups?
In general, this theory is called, in abbreviated form, ERG.
English abbreviation.
In Russian, the first is existence, that is, существование.
The second is relatedness, that is, it is an object.
I translate it simply from English,
because in the text you will see a slightly more scientific translation.
And the needs of growth.
Growth is just development.
So, existential, that is, existing needs.
This is the satisfaction of basic needs.
What are our basic needs?
Remember, the first is the second stage.
The first and the second.
Physiology, air, water, food and safety.
Polyclinic, stable salary, pension, safety.
The second is social.
Belonging.
This is the third and fourth stage.
The third is belonging, the fourth is social.
We establish this, we maintain significant contacts,
connections, interact with other people.
And these two stages are combined into one.
So, the first and the second are existential needs.
The third and the fourth are social needs.
And the fifth is the needs for self-expression.
Here is self-improvement, personal growth, needs.
Here he added the need for self-respect.
What did Alderfer do?
He simplified the Maslow theory.
If we remember this theory,
there are not five steps, but only three.
From the point of view of mathematics,
it is easier to remember three than five.
From the point of view of content,
it is the same, by and large.
The next one is the Maclean theory.
The leading role of consciousness in determining human behavior.
How interesting!
Here something already sounds from what we have already considered.
Conscious, unconscious.
Here is the leading role of consciousness.
A person has three main important needs.
What are they?
Here, with Maslow, he does not interfere.
This is something separate, completely separate.
In that slide, there are four theories.
Comments under his theory.
In comparison with Maslow's theory,
you will not find a blue highlight.
Because he really has a difference.
What are the three important needs?
Power, success and involvement.
Involvement, by the way, correlates with Maslow's needs.
Power, the desire to influence other people.
Self-esteem, according to Maslow.
It sounds a little different from Maclean.
Maybe even more rigid, more principled, more emphasized.
What kind of people are they?
Who have such needs?
These are good orators.
They demand high attention from others.
Leaders who call for themselves.
Leaders are energetic people.
They attract people to themselves.
They lead people.
Success, bringing work to a successful completion.
People focused on the result.
Look how everything is interconnected.
We had types of corporate cultures.
The culture of power, the culture of achievements,
the task, the result.
And here it is reflected.
You can't consider motivation separately.
A person in the company culture.
Everything is together.
Everything is interconnected.
Power, success, corporate culture,
which chooses people who have needs in power,
in management, in success.
And involvement.
These are people who identify themselves with the company.
They are involved in what is happening in the company.
What is being done there.
They build relationships.
They provide assistance.
They are ideal in communication.
These are people who are communicative, sociable.
Everyone is absolutely interesting to them.
These are the three interesting needs that Maclean highlighted.
They are worth considering.
And the theory of two factors.
This is the theory of Herzberg.
The theory was created based on interviews
taken at various workplaces in different professional groups
and in different countries.
The interviewers were asked to describe the situation
in which they felt complete satisfaction
and, on the contrary, dissatisfaction with their work.
The interviews were really interesting.
I imagine what the difficult surveys were,
how difficult it was to bring them together
and to draw some results.
He successfully did it and drew the theory of two factors.
The answers were classified into two groups.
Studying the collected material,
Herzberg came to the conclusion
that satisfaction and dissatisfaction with work
are caused by various factors.
The motivating factors are motivators.
The feeling of satisfaction from work is career growth.
Responsibility, positive assessment of achievements,
work content, work as a main motivator.
And the factors of the working conditions are hygienic factors,
dissatisfaction with work,
increased salary compared to competitors.
I don't like it because I know that
competitors pay more for the same work I do.
Indeed, everyone is watching each other.
We need to pay attention to this.
There is no secret in the market.
Although everyone is very careful about their salaries,
we have a very good information leak.
Benefits, social status, guarantees
and influence on personal life.
This has become very popular in recent years.
It is called life and work balance.
That is, the balance between work and personal life.
Many companies take this balance
between work and home as a value
in their values, in their guidelines.
They guarantee their employees this unique balance.
They don't have to work until death.
They don't have to work for years,
but for an intense period of time.
Sometimes people need to sleep,
go to visit, rest, spend the evening with friends.
That is, it is already indecent to work in the duodera.
It is wrong, ineffective.
This is where this life and work balance comes from.
It is also interesting, it is from the two-factor theory.
In order to effectively motivate subordinates,
the manager must understand the essence of the problem.
The essence of the problem in the process.
That is, if the theory that we just talked about,
four, the basic subject of the Maslow's,
were called substantive,
then the next theory that we will talk about
is the process theory of motivation.
There are substantive content,
certain needs and process.
A person invests his work,
certain efforts,
which depend not only on his needs,
but on certain aspects of the working situation.
A person distributes efforts to achieve various goals
and chooses a specific type of behavior.
The process theory of motivation
considers the influence of these two factors
on the behavior of a person.
There are three basic process theories of motivation.
What are they?
The theory of expectation.
The presence of an active need is not the only and necessary condition.
How interesting, the presence of a need is not the necessary condition for motivation.
The theory of justice.
And the model of Porter-Lowler.
We will talk about them later.
The theory of expectation.
The essence.
Why does a person choose a certain line of behavior?
The theory of expectation of Viktor Vrum
is based on the fact that
active needs are not the necessary condition
for motivation of a person to work.
What are the keys to this theory?
The result, validity and expectation.
What is the result?
What are the keys?
The result is anything related to the need of behavior at work.
For example, stress.
I am stressed because I got paid at work.
Respect from colleagues.
This is related to the need and the consequence of behavior at work.
Validity.
Subjective satisfaction with the result.
Subjective.
And expectation.
Expectation of successful performance of the task
under the condition of applying the appropriate efforts.
I apply efforts and expect a reward.
These are my efforts and my expectations for a reward.
Employees form expectations regarding the results of their behavior
using preliminary experience.
They decide whether it is possible or not to do something meaningful for them.
Let's take a salesman as an example.
He is a successful salesman.
He thinks that if he makes more than 9 deals per week,
and his percentage depends on the quantity and volume of the produced product,
he will get a reward.
It is likely that he will make a few more calls to potential buyers.
It is likely, if he is motivated.
But when a salesman thinks that the product is well used,
that additional sales transactions will not change the result,
that there will be no reward,
that he can leave work in the afternoon for additional efforts,
and so on,
will he make additional efforts?
If a person is 100% sure that his additional efforts will lead to additional expectations,
that is, they are realized,
that he made efforts and his expectations were met,
then he will do it.
He will satisfy his needs and he will work effectively.
If he is not sure, he will not work effectively.
The theory of justice.
The main postulates of this theory.
Employees evaluate their relationships by comparison.
The theory of justice is one of the most effective theories.
We always look in the neighbor's pocket.
Always.
And rarely when we compare something other than salary.
I am in marketing, he is in marketing.
We do the same thing.
I think so.
He thinks it can be different.
He does better, more, more qualified.
Subjective approach.
I have my own subjective approach.
The theory of justice.
Since we are in the same position,
because our position is called Aditakov,
marketing manager,
we must get the same salary.
To be fair.
If I do not see justice,
I am not satisfied,
then I will try to restore this justice.
I will hire my manager,
raise my salary.
What should I do to get a raise?
Sidor in another department gets other money.
There are two options.
Either I will be fired or I will get a raise.
Until people start to think
that they get a fair reward,
they will try to reduce the intensity of work.
While I go to my manager to get a raise,
what is my efficiency?
It is close to zero.
I am effectively engaged in the theory of justice
towards myself, my beloved.
But not in terms of efficiency of my work.
By the way, about salaries.
Salary reviews in large companies
are held twice a year.
IT specialists compare themselves
with IT specialists in the market,
banks with banks, etc.
Now more and more professional companies
make such reviews.
Hey Group, which offers these reviews,
has been launched.
Watson White is a global supplier of salary reviews.
More and more industries are included
in this review on the Russian market.
They hold this review twice a year.
It is very useful for employers.
Because you can always tell your employees,
my dear, I have an official document
that says that I pay you more than the market.
You will have good arguments.
The other question is whether he will calm down
after this or not.
It all depends on the person.
But it is always good to have such an argument on the table.
Porter-Lowry model.
The model contains features,
both the theory of expectation and the theory of justice.
As usual, the picture is the same,
just a slightly different topic,
but the very same.
The basis is the subject,
and they argue with it, improve, finish.
The same here.
What have they changed in these two theories?
And what have they come to?
Lyman Porter and Edward Lowler
have developed a complex process theory of motivation,
including elements of the theory of expectation
and the theory of justice.
What are the five variables they have laid down as a basis?
These are the efforts,
the perception,
the results,
the reward itself
for all this above-mentioned
natural satisfaction.
I spent effort,
my perception was that I am so effective,
so irreplaceable in general,
I have phenomenal results,
well, in principle, the reward suits me,
but suddenly I find out
that Vasya Vasichkin from the neighboring department
got a reward of $100 more than me.
So my satisfaction level will be zero,
and all my efforts from the previous four points will be reduced to zero,
because the theory of justice will just rumble in me,
and the theory of expectation will melt like smoke.
The results achieved depend on the efforts,
abilities, characteristic features,
and the realization of one's role.
The level of effort is determined by the value of the reward
and the degree of confidence,
the degree of confidence is very important,
that this level of effort
will really bring with it
a certain level of reward.
Where misunderstandings can occur,
misunderstandings,
it is really the efforts spent and the results obtained.
It seems to me that my boss thinks differently,
so my reward is like this,
it is not what I expected.
And in this theory, of course,
a certain ratio is established between the reward and the results.
And this ratio is very important to calculate correctly,
to position it correctly,
and to convey it correctly to the employee.
If you want to get this kind of bonus,
describe clearly what it should do and how.
And at each stage, what result do you expect from it?
Then he will consider that he got it fairly
or he did not get it fairly.
Because, as a rule, we have to explain when a person has not received it.
When he received it, in principle, there are no questions according to his expectations.
Then it will be easier for you to explain to your employee
that the theory of his expectations, your theory of justice,
are in full correlation with each other
and there should be a complete mutual understanding
that if he had made more efforts in these and these places,
then his expectations in terms of reward would be justified to a greater extent.
Let's continue the conversation about the model of Porter-Lowler.
They explained the motivation mechanism as follows.
The results achieved by the employee depend on three variables.
1. The efforts spent.
2. Abilities.
3. Characteristic features of a person.
And here consciousness plays its role in this process of achieving the result.
So, the efforts spent, abilities and characteristic features of a person.
Speaking from the employee's point of view,
what does the employee always take into account?
The efforts spent.
And what does the supervisor take into account, comparing the employees?
Only the efforts spent? No.
Abilities.
One is more capable than the other.
Or one has one ability, the other has another.
Someone is very motor,
and starts the project easily.
But in order to continue the project,
to do routine work, for example, documentation,
one needs people with different abilities and characteristics.
For example, if you have cholera at the beginning,
then you have bloodsuckers and melancholics.
Therefore, the characteristic features of a person play a very important role in achieving the results.
Hence, some people are more successful and achieve greater results,
others are less successful and achieve less results.
Is it necessary that those who achieve less results are not in their place,
do not do their job,
and in general, should we ask whether it is possible to change them to more successful ones?
The question is complex.
Maybe.
Or maybe not.
Because not all people can be equally successful.
And not every person can be equally successful from year to year.
There are always ups and downs for every person.
And one more interesting point to pay attention to.
The level of effort spent depends on the value of the reward.
And on how much a person believes in this connection between his or her expenses and efforts
and the possibility of receiving this reward.
A very important remark.
The value of the reward.
If a person is not interested in his or her 100$ bonus,
because it is not money for him,
he will not spend the maximum of his efforts very effectively.
If the 100$ bonus is a matter of life and death,
the result will be completely different.
If the value of the reward is not money,
but, for example, if a person does it,
he will have prospects for career growth,
up the ladder.
And for him this value
will be extremely effective.
If he does not have such a goal,
he does not want to make a career,
I met many such people,
because they are interested in developing at a professional level.
By the way, salaries are also moving in two directions.
Here we have a career vector and a vector of professionalism.
If before the higher the manager in the position, the more salary,
now colossal salaries are paid by professionals.
For this, you do not need to occupy a high position in management,
it is enough to be a professional in your field, a guru,
to get more than a top manager.
That is, the value of the reward.
If a career prospect opens up for me,
and I am interested in it,
I will work.
If not, then no.
And it is very important to determine
what other achievements,
requirements, levels of the result,
can actually attract internal rewards.
What else is important for a person?
We have already talked about the award.
We have already talked about the praise,
promotion in the service.
That is, if I am awarded for my efforts throughout the campaign,
then yes, I think that such a goal is worthy of my efforts.
Here is such a model,
combining the theory of expectation with the theory of justice.
It was created, by the way, very interesting.
Again, it is applicable.
How many people, how many theories,
how many theories, how many different adherents of one or another approach.
Actually, each model is interesting,
applicable in practice.
I think that some of the listed things we have studied today,
you will take to arms,
you have already used something,
you will use something.
In any case, these are existing models,
they work and are applied in practice in companies.
In conclusion, we will talk a little,
we will summarize and talk about what we have studied today
and how we can use it.
The first questions are probably those
that the head of any link should ask himself.
On motivation.
After listening, analyzing the whole material,
think and ask yourself,
what do my subordinates need?
Here are two directions.
The first one.
What do my subordinates and the list need?
What do they need?
For example, more attention from the head,
that is, from me.
Pay attention to details,
to some informal groups,
that is, to determine what is interesting for them.
Probably, use an annual interview for this,
or just talk to people,
arrange a meeting, discuss.
The second step that prompts this question,
the second option is
Do I know what they need at all?
Maybe you know and will quickly write a list.
Or you didn't think about it at all.
Do they need something?
They get paid, what else do they need?
Everything is fine.
Think about it.
In what world are the needs satisfied
during the activities
aimed at achieving the goals of the organization?
That is, your organization has some goals
and there are people.
And how much these goals and needs of people
who work in the organization are satisfied?
If people are satisfied,
it is clear that the organization will achieve these goals.
Another question.
If the satisfaction of work
and productivity of subordinates has increased,
why did this happen?
Good question, really.
And if they did not grow, why did it happen?
When they grew up,
they usually ask
why the efficiency of your department has fallen.
Answer me quickly. Why?
And they never ask so strictly,
why are you so effective?
Interestingly, in my practice,
there were several cases
when Western managers asked managers
why they had such big sales this year,
even with a claim in the voice.
The completely broken manager said,
what do you not like?
We sell so much more than planned.
A very reasonable answer.
You had the wrong budget.
You lowered the budget.
The budget should be different.
If the budget was not 100, but 120,
and the implementation is 125,
then the bonus would be only 5%
for the re-implementation of the budget of 120.
Otherwise, it turns out 25,
and the budget is 100.
Everything is interconnected.
And not always very effective work
can please the management.
Somewhere it will be exciting
when the organization is formed,
and somewhere it will not.
Something was really wrongly planned.
When you ask questions,
other questions arise reasonably.
How to measure the results of work?
Can you measure it?
How can you measure it?
And if you can measure,
how to give them an assessment,
and how often should you give an assessment?
And how much we have succeeded
in achieving our goals.
And if we have not advanced enough,
then we know why and what to do
so as not to fail next year in business,
and not to be out of the market at all,
not to leave it,
not to lose a piece of your market,
your interest, your margin.
These questions are very correct.
And really, to measure the result of work,
yes, it is finance, but it is not only finance.
Remember, we talked about
when the depth of the hierarchy,
the depth of the structure is studied,
then the question of the organizational health index arises.
The health index and surveys
help us measure the result of work,
the motivation of the staff,
and the assessment of the work of people.
All these things,
all these surveys, reviews,
give us an opportunity to see
a picture of all our victories and defeats.
And it gives us a good opportunity
to analyze what we need to do,
how to act correctly,
or at least where to look for answers
to these very difficult questions.
And the questions that often depend on them
are whether to live or not to live in the company,
and whether to continue in the market.
The next group of such, in general,
is no longer questions, but advice,
although, probably,
you can still say information for reflection.
Some advice on satisfying social needs of the staff.
Now we will repeat a little
what we have managed to study.
Remember, social needs.
This is the third, fourth stage in the Maslow's Pyramid.
So, in order to satisfy these needs of the staff,
what do you need to do as a manager?
Give the employees a job
that would help them communicate.
That is, if you see that you have employees
who have a strong need,
that is, it is important for them as air,
as the first physiological thing.
For them, communication is air.
Try to find an application for them.
Maybe they will be engaged in corporate newspapers.
Maybe they will be engaged in corporate trips,
even in the organization of some insurance, something else.
Maybe, even if it is optional,
maybe it is not even necessary,
he does his job,
but it will give him an opportunity to express himself.
Create a team spirit.
We have already talked about team building.
It is really important.
Of course, hold meetings with your employees.
It is very important to inform your employees
about what is happening in the company.
Why is it important?
It gives you an opportunity,
in addition to satisfying the social needs of your staff,
to understand the feedback,
what worries them, what bothers them,
and to prevent rumors.
This is also a very interesting topic.
Rumors in the organization are sometimes created on purpose,
sometimes they are cultivated.
This is a completely separate topic.
But they also need to be controlled.
They also need to be controlled,
they also need to be kept on the pulse.
These meetings will help to manage these things.
Do not try to destroy the existing informal groups.
Unless, of course, they bring some negative component to the organization,
or do not cause damage.
It is not worth it.
On the contrary, take the most out of this benefit.
And, of course, create some conditions for the members of your organization
outside of its framework.
Corporate parties, for example.
A great option.
Satisfaction of the needs in respect of the staff.
How can this be done?
Offer subordinate more substantive work.
For example, without adding a deposit,
without changing the position,
just say,
seeing that a person has such a huge rush,
say, listen, I need help.
Help in this direction, in this project.
Can you help?
Your knowledge is irreplaceable.
We respect you.
Your level is very important.
The person will be happy.
If a person has this need, he will be happy.
He will gladly go and do everything there.
And will be satisfied.
And will not require a reward,
because the reward for him is the respect and trust he has.
This is already a reward.
Provide your employees with a positive feedback
on the results achieved.
Remember, we talked about the fact that there is a knot,
a gingerbread, a reward and a punishment.
And that it is better to refuse punishment.
Right.
It is better to encourage.
I encouraged these people.
I would like to encourage others too.
They will try.
What are they worse at?
They also want to be good.
Attract your employees to make decisions.
Trust and respect.
Consult.
Learn their opinion.
Often they can suggest the perfect options
to get out of some difficult situations.
Often they seem to be dead ends.
Our people are very smart, talented and creative.
When you ask them why they are silent,
they say that no one asked.
Ideas are amazing.
And, of course, there is a tendency to delegate
to those who have additional rights and powers.
And, of course, they will ask you for your responsibilities.
If I trust you, delegate, I will ask you.
You will answer me.
I will not cover you, but you will answer me.
Not for me, but for yourself.
As a manager, I am responsible for all the mistakes of the department.
And the manager who says that he is not a fool
will never say that.
He will say that he is to blame.
Because you are the manager, you are paid.
As a manager, you must take all the risks.
But this delegation...
It is clear that if something goes wrong,
the manager will be punished for the project he lost.
Even for delegating.
But you must be able to take this blow.
This is professionalism.
And another important point.
If there is an opportunity to promote employees on the career ladder.
Again, the hierarchy in the company.
22 steps, 6 steps.
You can promote more, you can promote less.
But you can promote inside the steps.
Remember, we just talked about the career ladder up and professional.
A professional can be a junior, senior, a leader, a guru.
Let's say, we have already drawn several steps on this flat line.
There is such an opportunity to promote.
Even if it is a ladder, but still a certain career ladder.
And the salary, of course, also depends on it.
And training is a great motivator.
Training, people raise their level, competence, qualification and communicate.
By the way, training can also be attributed to the satisfaction of socialization needs.
During training, if people from different departments are mixed,
they often even get to know each other.
After working for several years in the company, they do not know each other,
because they have never had to touch.
The needs in self-expression of the staff.
How to satisfy them?
Provide the subordinates with the opportunity to learn and develop.
Look, the learning and development with a red thread goes through all the needs.
We respect you, we trust you, we teach you.
We believe that you are loyal, we believe that you will not leave us.
We invest money in you, we count on you.
Socialization.
You can communicate with people, you can show yourself, look at others, compare.
Self-expression.
During training, you can show yourself, you will be noticed,
maybe we will look at you with different eyes.
Training is a very motivating factor from different sides.
The main thing is to use it correctly.
And the results of training.
Give the subordinates a difficult job, requiring full return from them.
This is a great trust and, of course, a colossal self-expression of people.
Because something new is absolutely for them,
mobilizes and they are more effective.
Not only what they did routinely, but this is what captures them,
again, those who are motivated by it.
And to learn, to develop creative abilities in every possible way.
If the company has the opportunity, to direct these people to some different projects.
Well, that's all for today, dear colleagues.
I hope that your time was not wasted in vain.
In any case, I really hope that all the material that we discussed with you today
will be useful to you and that the lecture was interesting.
It seems to me that I will not make any special recommendations
on reading books and literature on this topic.
Because, again, I repeat, read the sources.
It is very interesting.
Actually, it will be your communication with the author.
If we remember Munchausen, then remember when he said,
I communicate directly with Shakespeare.
Please, communicate directly, if you are interested, with Freud, Maslow, with other theorists.
Because, probably, this will be the most correct communication,
not through the prism of someone else's perception.
It will be only you and only the person who was the founder of the theory.
And, of course, I advise you to read the founders.
Because everyone else worked on it, reworked it,
but in any case, the basis was laid by some specific theorist.
So, start working with him, if he is interesting for you.
And, in principle, all the knowledge that you have received today
will be more than enough for you as managers
in order to, first of all, look at yourself,
at what kind of person you are, in what company you work,
what style of management you have,
how you work with your subordinates,
whether you know how to motivate them, whether you know how to listen to them,
how you recruited your staff,
how you plan your employees' career growth.
That is, all those aspects that are very important, vital factors for your subordinates,
for your employees, and for you in relation to your management.
Thank you very much for your attention.